Add documentation for controlling the SVG output (#40)
rism-digital/verovio-reference-book: _book/04-advanced-topics/04-controlling-the-svg-output.md

        scale: 30
        scaleToPageSize: True
        spacingStaff: 12
---

### Page units and dimensions

Verovio uses an abstract unit for specifying the page dimensions. By default, the page height is `2970` and the page width is `2100`. These are equivalent to the dimension of an A4 page in tenths of a millimeter. When generating SVG, these units are interpreted as pixels, which means that the default SVG image size is **2970px** height by **2100px** width. 

The example below shows an empty page with the default dimensions – and the option `--justifyVertically` turned on.

{% include music-notation-only example="01-default" %}

The option `--mm-output` can be turned on to have the page dimension being interpreted as millimeters. In that case, the SVG image will have a size of **297mm** by **210mm**, which is recommended if the SVG is meant to be printed or converted to PDF.

Page margins (`--page-margin-bottom`,  `--page-margin-left`,  `--page-margin-right` and  `--page-margin-top`) are all specified in abstract units, with a default value of `50`. That is **50px** with the default SVG output and **5mm** with the `--mm-output` option turned on.

#### MEI unit

> Most of the options in Verovio are given in MEI units. An MEI unit (or MEI virtual unit) corresponds to half the distance between adjacent staff lines where the interline space is measured from the middle of a staff line. The value of the MEI unit in Verovio will determine the size of the staff on a page. By default, the MEI unit is `9.0`, which means that a staff space is 9 abstract units. In terms of staff size (or raster), it means a staff size of **72px** in the default SVG output, or **7.2mm** with the `--mm-output` option turned on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many of the measurements in Verovio are given in MEI units. An MEI unit (or MEI virtual unit) is an abstract unit; that is, it does not correspond to any specific unit such as pixels or millimetres. An MEI unit corresponds to half the distance between adjacent staff lines where the interline space is measured from the middle of a staff line. The value of the MEI unit in Verovio will determine the size of the staff on a page. By default, the MEI unit is `9.0`, which means that a staff space is 9 abstract units. In terms of staff size (or raster), the default unit value corresponds to a staff size of **72px** in the default SVG output (8px/unit), or **7.2mm** (0.8mm/unit) with the `--mm-output` option enabled.
```

Author: I don't understand `(8px/unit)`. What does it mean?

Reviewer: If the default unit is "9" and the default staff height is "72px" then that's 72px / 9u = 8px/u?

Reviewer: OK -- so a unit value of 15 would be 15px/unit. 

I got confused with "staff space is 9 abstract units" -- this isn't really correct then? A staff space is 2 "abstract units", or 18px, or 1.8mm. 

A full "staff" (five lines) is 8u / 72px / 7.2mm.

Reviewer: Is that the measurement to the middle of each staff line, or are the staff lines added to the total height? So a staff might be 8u, and the staff lines are 2px high, then is it 72px total, or 72px + (2px * 5) = 82px?

Author: The measurement is to the middle of the staff line. So the total staff height would be 74px

Reviewer: I'm wondering if it's better to leave out the "72px" then, since the total height would actually be `(unit * 8) + (((staffLineWidth * unit) * 2) / 2)`? (e.g., `(9 * 8) + (((0.15 * 9) * 2) / 2)` by default)

Reviewer: I wasn't suggesting that we remove the table, though! I agree that it is useful.

Author: I was calculating with the 2px you gave as example above.

We can say "72px (excluding staff line width)", which seems logical since it is stated that spaces are calculated from the middle of the line. 

This is a standard practice I think. You can look in Behind Bars, or for the Dorico documentation that is very similar https://steinberg.help/dorico/v1/en/dorico/topics/notation_reference/notation_reference_staves_staff_size_changing_layouts_t.html

Reviewer: Yeah, I gave my first example before looking up how `staffLineWidth` was defined... sorry for the confusion.

I think it's fine to explain it, but was just trying to figure out how to reconcile the documentation with the user's experience. If a user measures their "default" staff rendering and finds it to be more than 72px then they might question whether the documentation needs to be corrected, since the value of 72px doesn't really exist anywhere in the output (I think). 

I'm even questioning if we need to mention 72px at all, since we've just said that the MEI virtual units, and Verovio abstract units, are not tied to a "physical" unit size at all. So it seems a bit disjointed to contradict that in the last sentence of the paragraph.

Reviewer: Oh, I was thinking more in terms of CSS control, positioning, etc. It's not a big deal -- we can keep it as 72 if you want.

> In traditional music engraving, the staff size corresponds to the raster, which would be chosen depending of the type of score to be engraved. That would mean changing the MEI unit. However, in digital environments featuring responsive layout, there should be no need to change the default value of the MEI unit. The layout should be controlled with the page (i.e., the window or screen) size and scaling (see below). Nonetheless, the unit can be adjusted in Verovio with the `--unit` option. That can be useful if Verovio is used to replicate a print layout with a specific traditional page and staff size. The table below gives an indication of values for the MEI unit in Verovio corresponding to raster sizes as found in the literature or some music notation software applications.

Reviewer: I would move this paragraph to be the first one of this section (under the "MEI unit" heading). The last sentence can be kept here.

Author: Then we need to rewrite them because the MEI unit needs to be defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In traditional music engraving, the staff size corresponds to the raster which would be chosen depending of the type and size of score to be engraved. However, in digital environments there is generally no need to change the size of the raster since the size of the notation can be changed on the screen depending on the size and orientation of the screen (i.e., "responsive" environments). This is usually changed by adjusting the page size and scaling factors (see below).

However, for some cases it may be necessary to change the size of the raster size within a digital environment. This may be useful, for example, to replicate a print layout with a specific traditional page and staff size. With Verovio, the raster size can be adjusted with the `--unit` option, which adjusts the definition of an MEI units. One MEI unit (or MEI virtual unit) corresponds to half the distance between adjacent staff lines where the interline space is measured from the middle of a staff line. 

The default value of `unit` in Verovio is `9.0`, which corresponds to 9px per unit in SVG, or 0.9mm with the `--mm-output` option enabled. The table below gives an indication of values for the MEI unit in Verovio corresponding to raster sizes as found in the literature or some music notation software applications.
```

Reviewer: I've combined this paragraph and the previous one, and tried to get the definition of "unit" right.

{% aside .warning %}
Up to Verovio 3.13 only integer MEI units are supported.
{% endaside %}

The example below shows the same file as above with the default A4 page size but with a unit value of `6.0`. More music will be rendered on a page because the staff size is smaller.

{% include music-notation-only example="02-units" %}

Changing the page dimension will increase the amount of music that fits on the page. The example below has been rendered with the default unit of `9.0` but a page height of `3050` and a page width of `2290`, a more typical paper size for sheet music than A4.

{% include music-notation-only example="03-page-size" %}

### Scaling

The SVG output in Verovio can be scaled by using the `--scale` option. The option value is an integer representing a scaling percentage. It is `100` percent by default.

When changing the scale option, Verovio will by default change the size of the output SVG image. For example, with the default page size and a scale option set to `50` percent, the resulting SVG image will have a size of **1485px** by **1050px**. The same amount of music will be engraved on the page as with the default scale value.

> In responsive environments, Verovio can be used to create user interfaces where the user can zoom in and out. This can be achieved by changing the scale and the page dimensions. Zooming out means increasing the page dimensions and reducing the scale by the same factor, and zooming in the opposite. For example, if the window in which the output of Verovio will be displayed is 1800px by 800px, these can be set as a page height and page width and Verovio will produce an SVG image that fits the window with the default scale value of 100 percent. To implement a zooming out function, for example by a factor 2, the page dimensions have to be changed to 3600 by 1600 and the scale to 50. The output SVG image will then still have a size that fits the window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In responsive environments, Verovio can be used to create user interfaces where the user can change the magnification ("zoom"). This can be achieved by changing the scale and the page dimensions. Zooming out means increasing the page dimensions and reducing the scale by the same factor, and zooming in the opposite. For example, if the window in which the output of Verovio will be displayed is 1800px by 800px, these can be set as a page height and page width and Verovio will produce an SVG image that fits the window with the default scale value of 100 percent. To implement a zooming out function, for example by a factor 2, the page dimensions have to be changed to 3600 by 1600 and the scale to 50. The output SVG image will then still have a size that fits the window.
```

> Verovio has a `--scale-to-page-size` option that simplifies this process and that is recommended to be turned on in responsive environments. The advantage is that does not require the page dimensions to be calculated by the user when implementing zoom in or zoom out. With this option turned on, implementing a zoom function only requires the scale percentage to be changed and not the page dimensions. Keep in mind that the layout needs to be recalculated when the scale value is changed – see below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verovio has a `--scale-to-page-size` option that simplifies this process. Using this option is recommended in responsive environments. The advantage is that does not require the page dimensions to be calculated directly, but Verovio will calculate changes to the page sizes internally depending on the scale value and an initial page size.
```

Author: I find it confusing to say the in changes the page sizes internally. The `--page-height` and `--page-width` values remain the same. Your wording might be understood that the values will change.

Reviewer: From the previous paragraph you said that the "old way" means changing scale, width, and height in order to get the scale to work. 

The "new way" (with `--scale-to-page-size` enabled) needs to only adjust the scale value, so unless something different is happening I would guess that Verovio is automatically calculating the sizes internally. I was trying to draw a link between the previous paragraph and the "new" way.

The example below shows a file rendered with a page height of `800`, a width of `1600` and the default scale of `100` percent.

{% include music-notation-only example="04-responsive-page" %}

The example below is the same file rendered with the same page dimensions as above, but with the option `--scale-to-page-size` turned on and a scale of `30` percent. The SVG image size remains the same but the amount of music rendered has increased accordingly.

{% include music-notation-only example="05-responsive-page" %}

> #### Layout recalculation

Reviewer: These two paragraphs should probably be moved up above the examples, and not in a separate section, since they refer to the `--scale-to-page-size` option.
